Hey folks, today we're going to be going
through a really common coding question,
number of islands. We see this asked at
a wide variety of companies, Uber,
Snapchat, LinkedIn, Amazon, Meta, pretty
much across the board. Now, I'd love to
go through this problem with you, but
instead today, we're going to do
something special, and I brought my
friend Min here uh from the popular
coding channel Minmmer to give you all a
walk through. I'm going to link their
channel in the description. They do a
bunch more breakdowns of problems like
this and it's definitely worth a follow
if you're preparing for coding
interviews. Also, we'd love to hear
about the mix of content on the channel,
but if you all feel that coding content
would be helpful for you, uh we'd love
to add more. So, leave a note in the
comments with what you like to see. Hey
y'all. Today we're going to be solving
Leico 200 number of islands where given
an M byN 2D matrix that represents a map
of land and water. We want to return the
number of islands. Seeing this visually,
here's our matrix of zeros and ones.
Ones are land and zeros are water. We
need to return the number of islands.
Right away, we know this to be two. This
is our answer. This is what we return.
The question remains, how do we solve
this programmatically and think within
the confines of general programming
rules? Well, by the looks of it, it
seems pretty easy. We'll run a single
for loop for each of the columns for the
singular given row. And whenever we
encounter land, we'll increment a count
variable.
Here's our second one.
Great. But I do see in le codes examples
that there can be more than one row. We
could say have an M of five. Okay. Okay.
Don't panic. In this case, it's not too
far of a leap to go from one for loop to
two for loops, or in other words, a
nested for loop. One for each row and
another for each column. As for the rest
of the logic, it'll remain more or less
the same. Whenever we encounter land,
we'll increment our integer count. Four
would be our answer, and that's what we
return. Taking a quick glance, that'd be
these four.
As a small concern, we kind of took the
definition of an island for granted.
Let's be doubly sure. An island is
surrounded by water and is formed by
connecting adjacent lands horizontally
or vertically. Gotcha. So, for this
island, it's an island of four land
because these ones are connected in one
of four directions. It's not like
there's going to be a variance after
that allows for eight directions and
other miscellaneous changes in
requirements. That'd be silly. But
anyway, I think we've built enough
intuition to start a walk through. Let's
just yolo with another example. All
righty. As established, we'll run a
nested loop. And for each cell, check if
we have land or water. Land, we count.
Water, we ignore. Kicking it off on the
first iteration, we have water because
it's a zero. We shall skip it. Moving
on, we experience deja vu, we have
another zero. We'll continue on. After
we observe that we have land, let's
increase count by one.
After that, we repeat our logic since we
have land yet again. Increment our count
to two and double count our island.
That's not correct. We clearly have a
singular island since the ones are
connected, but I mistakenly counted them
as two islands. All right, our logic
fails. We must revise our approach that
when we encounter the first land of the
whole island, yes, we want to increment
our count. But for the remainder of the
island, this cell, we ideally want to
note that it's been visited and thus
skip the double counting.
Same goes for the other island. Since
we're using a nested for loop
specifically to go down and to the
right, then this would be the first land
we encounter, right? From here, we
dispatch some sort of algorithm to mark
it and the other ones as visited so that
when we get to them in our nested for
loop, we'll know not to redundantly
count them.
We successfully count this island as
one, not three dispirit pieces. One
clever way to update the land to the
visited state is to set it to zero.
Right? As we saw, whenever we stumble
upon water, we'd skip processing. We can
use that to our advantage. So, to
summarize everything thus far, the
moment we encounter land, we'll
increment our count variable and
dispatch some algo to mark everything as
visited. This way, we'll know never to
recount an island. Okay, sounds
reasonable. But what algorithm do we
need to accomplish this? The answer is
DFS, depth first search. If this was
quite the leap, I apologize, but DFS is
a common traversal technique for graph
problems. And if you really think about
it, a matrix is just another way to
represent a graph. DFS is often
implemented recursively, which just
means we do the same set of procedures
over and over again until we cannot.
Let's give it a try. We were here,
remember? We'll update our count to one
and then run some DFS logic where on the
first call we'll mark this piece of land
as visited. Remember this meant mutating
it to a zero. After we should explore
the remainder of the island which by
definition can be connected in four
directions.
The order doesn't matter. So I'll just
pick randomly. We'll bias towards going
bottom first and then top, right, and
left. There is no way I can remember
that. So, I'm going to make a quick note
for myself.
Right. And then left. Sounds good. We'll
go to the bottom first. But hold on
though. There's no land. There's nothing
but water. Let's not waste our breath
and try another direction. Next, we'll
attempt to go up.
This means subtracting one from our row
to get -1. Um, that's not a thing. We'd
be out of bounds.
Let's try going to the right.
Thankfully, we wouldn't be out of bounds
and we don't have water. Neither of the
two previous cases. We'll happily
recurse forward here. We'll procedurally
repeat our set of tasks. Mark that land
as visited and then go in all four
directions. I'll tell you right now, we
cannot go down, up, right, and check
this next part out. We technically
cannot go to the left either. That's
exactly what we want. To play devil's
advocate, if these two cells were still
unmarked ones, do you see how we'd get
infinite loops for all of eternity? Any
who, it's visually hard to see, but
we've exhausted all four directions of
the top right coordinate. Thus, we'll
backtrack back to where we are right
here. Continuing where we left off, if
we had tried the bottom, top and right,
then we have one last direction to
inspect to the left. To no one's
surprise, this is a base case because
it's water, an integer of zero. We
backtrack once more and return upstream
to our nested for loop. We just finished
a whole DFS call. Great job. We move on
to the next iteration where, with great
relief, no longer double count this
island. Our eyes do not deceive us. We
have water. So our count correctly stays
at one.
At this point, I think we know what
happens. The cell afterwards is water.
So we skip, skip, skip, and skip. One
big skip and no skip. We're pretty much
veterans now. Let's increase our count
to two for the two islands and walk
through another DFS invocation.
Update the one to a zero and inspect all
possible directions. Let's go to the
bottom. Except we can't. Top. Nope. It's
water. Moving on, we try the right.
Hooray. It's land. Let's do some more
exploration. We'll convert where we
currently are in terms of the row and
column to visited. From here, we'll
actually find success going down. where
we update land to be zero. We cannot go
down because our row would be five not
inbounds of the 024.
Moving on, as per our algo, we do not go
up because it's water. Fantastic. Turns
out we cannot go to the right or left
either. We officially exhausted all four
directions. We'll backtrack, which just
means we return back to our previous
function call that took place in this
cell. To remind you, we tried going
down. So, let's try the other three
directions. To no one's surprise, this
leads us nowhere.
So, let's rewind upstream to our
original stack frame where the same
thing happens. We do not go to the left
because our column would be negative
one. That's out of bounds. We finish the
rest of our nested for loop in which we
don't find any more islands. We somehow
managed to drown everything as we were
counting them. Two islands is our
answer. This is what we return. The time
complexity
is m * n. Now this may be whiplash. How
do we have an m byn time complexity if
we had logic within a nested for loop?
Here is the first one. Here's the
second. Shouldn't it be m² * n 2? Not
quite. Although we dispatch a DFS in a
nested for loop, we only process each
sale one time and one time only. To be
precise, whenever we encounter a zero,
we skip it and never come back. Whenever
we encounter land, we update it to be a
zero and then never come back to it.
Yeah. Yeah. We technically loop over
these visited cells.
But this is big O theory. Remember these
are additive to our time complexity
which as constants can be dropped. The
space complexity is also m * n because
imagine a 2D matrix that only had ones
like so our DFS would consume m * n
stack frames. Amazing. We did it. I
think we're ready for the code. For the
OG problem, I'll be using Hello
Interviews editor because the first
thing we'll do is implement the whole
function.
And voila, we are done. Just kidding.
We'll do it ourselves.
To set ourselves up for success, let's
write some syntactic sugar for the rows
and the columns, which will be the
length of our matrix.
Let's also spin up our account and
return it before I forget.
Now let's write our nested for loop. The
outer one for the rows and the inner one
for the columns. On each cell, let's
inspect what kind of geography we're on.
If it's water, we do nothing. But if
it's a one for land, then we have
ourselves an island. We'll do two
things. We'll increment our count to
include the island and then run a DFS
function. And of course, we need to pass
in where we currently are.
Let's implement our recursive function
which like I just mentioned takes in the
row and column. This should feel like
deja vu where on any given function
we'll update the grid at this row and
column to water. So zero. Then we'll
look in all four directions. Do you
remember our order of operations? We'll
go to the bottom first and call DFS.
But we only do this if our rows is
inbounds. And if there is land there
similarly we'll go up. So we minus one
from row and we do this on two
contingencies. If our row is greater
than zero and what's there at the row
minus one is land.
We have two directions left. We go to
the right. If we add one to columns and
it's still in bounds. And of course
what's there is land. We call DFS and go
to the right. Lastly, to go left, we
only do so if our columns is greater
than zero. And where would be is more
part of our island.
Once we've exhausted all four
directions, we'll return.
We'll run the test cases. And
awesome. Normally, I'd say we're done,
but let's actually dry run this code.
Interviewers might require you to do so.
Walking through your code line by line.
Let's do it. Okay, here's our new
example. On the first line of execution,
I do notice there's an optimization
where if the given grid is empty, then
we can immediately return zero islands.
Smart. But like before, we'll initialize
all the required variables. We'll then
go into our for loop and note that on
the next call, we find land. So, let's
call our DFS function. In here, we'll
update the one to a zero and go through
the gauntlet of if statements. We'll
successfully go down first
where we'll do the same thing. Update
one to zero
and keep recursing downwards.
In this stack frame, we'll update land
to water, fail to go down, but we will
go to the right where there is more
land, update to zero, and eventually go
up.
We're repeating our logic, we'll go up
once more,
exhausting every piece of land on this
island. Here we try the rest of the
directions to no avail. And then we'll
return.
We're backtracking, unwinding all of our
stack frames all the way back.
We move upstream back to our nested for
loop where we'll continue it until we
approach more land,
which eventually we do right here at row
zero and column of three. Going through
the motions, we'll mutate the grid and
then go down. And on this stack frame,
we'll do the same exact thing. All four
directions don't lead to more land. So,
we'll backtrack returning that and
returning once more. Notice that for
both islands, we incremented the
account, which is now correctly two.
We'll quickly go through the rest of the
matrix where there is no more land.
Two is our answer. That's what we
return. Cool. Let's look at a popular
variant.
Companies may ask you the original Leo
problem, which to me is a godsend, but
they might also not. In other words,
they could ask you a variation of the OG
problem. In regards to that Leo 200, now
named area of islands. Notice the
differences in the description. That
one, we're now given eight possible
directions. We can connect land
horizontally, vertically, but now also
diagonally. So in addition to our four
original directions, we can now also go
top right, bottom right, bottom left,
and top left. The second difference is
that our grid input may be empty. This
is just a preconditional check in our
function. We already took note of this
in the code beforehand. Lastly, three,
and perhaps this is the main difference,
is that we have to return the area of
each island. If we were given a grid
like so, then with these new directions
in mind, this would be an island and
this would be another. We no longer
return two for the two islands, but
rather the area. This one has three and
this one five. This is our answer. This
is what we return. We've built a lot of
context from the original legal problem.
So, I'll pose this question. How do we
modify our existing solution to solve
this? Well, if we had four if statements
for four directions, why not eight if
statements for eight directions? You're
probably thinking, men, this is not
clean code, which is fair, but if you
think about it, eight is the maximum
number of directions possible, right?
Have you ever come across a legal
problem that has allowed for more? If we
never have to extend beyond this, I
don't really mind hard coding. However,
on the flip side, it's pretty errorprone
and timeconuming to write all eight
conditionals. So fine, it's reasonable
to wrap everything into a single for
loop. Nice. The more difficult challenge
is the return type. How do we return the
area of each island presumably in a
list? Let's look at another example and
see what intuition we can gain. Here's
our grid. Immediately, we notice an
island size of four. Diagonal directions
are a thing. Now, remember from the
problem before, we know we should use
DFS.
Although that's true, maybe we should
think about DFS in a more structured
way. Maybe that way we'll better know
how to modify our logic. As we saw, DFS
is an algo that's typically fragmented
among these cells in which each fragment
is a different function call. Whatever
our new logic to find the area is, it
must fit squarely, no pun intended, into
each function call. What I'm suggesting
is that we could initialize an area of
one on each invocation,
which ultimately and collectively will
sum up to our resulting area of four.
Expanding on this, for any given
recursive call, there are two ways that
our code flows. the recursion forward
and the backtrack um back. They work
hand in hand. As an example, if we were
right here, we may execute lines to
update the one to a zero and explore the
left cell where we do pretty much the
same thing, but after we exhaust all
eight directions, so forth and so forth,
we'd backtrack.
That's the distinction I'm trying to
make here. Okay, a lot of ideas. Let me
officially show you in a DFS
walkthrough. We'd begin our nested for
loop and dispatch the first DFS right
here. On the recursion forward, we still
do the usual and mark the current cell
as visited. But now we'll also spin up a
local area of one for this one piece of
land. We'll also loop over each of the
eight directions and see what hits. It's
obvious at this point we'd go to the
bottom right here. We repeat our
recursive logic on the recurse forward.
Update one to be zero. Initialize a one
for the area of one. Explore all
directions, but really we know we're
going to go down. Mutate the grid to be
zero. Spin up an area of one and go to
the left. Do the same thing. Let's slow
things down just a little bit. Do we go
to the top? Nope. It's water, so there's
no point. Do we go to the top right?
Thankfully, no. It used to be land but
we made sure it was visited so we don't
revisit it. Same goes for the right
direction. There is water. These two
cells are water and these three are out
of bounds. We don't go there. Now we'll
debut our backtracking logic. We'll
choose the return the area of one for
the upstream function invocation
where back here we'll add the one to
this one to make two.
And what do you know? We indeed have an
island size of two so far. We try the
rest of the directions only to find no
more land. We return the area of two.
These two back to the parent call adding
it to the 1. What's 1 + 2 is three. We
exhaust all eight directions eventually
backtracking returning the three to be
added to the one to get four. Amazingly
four is a part of our overall result. So
why not initialize a result variable to
append that to the area of four. Sweet.
Our DFS finishes and we continue our
nested for loop until we bump into
another island which we do right here.
We'll call our recursive functionality
marking this one to be zero so that we
don't recount it. localize an area of
one and try all eight directions in
which we find failure until this
direction where on this stack frame
we'll do it all over again. There's no
land around us. We backtrack add one to
one to make up the two pieces of land.
Let's also append that to our result. On
the next iteration of our nested for
loop, we're glad to skip over this water
that used to be land. And we keep
skipping, skipping, skipping until our
last island. Spoiler alert, running DFS
here finds that we have an area of one.
Let's tack that on.
This is our answer. This is what we
return. Our time and space complexities
both remain the same as before,
especially if our result variable is
counted as auxiliary space. We now have
the knowledge to modify our
implementation. Let's begin. Now, as we
extend the code, things can get
confusing to track. What do we delete?
What do we keep? What do we modify? But
come on, we're owners of this part of
the codebase. We're practically
professionals. We'll opt to keep this
line. But beware, our code will implode
if we're given an empty grid. Recall
that's now a possibility that if we're
given an empty grid, we'll simply return
an empty list. No area was found.
Next up, we have not four but eight
directions. Our plan was to demolish our
manual if statements and instead loop
over a set of directions. Let's
represent this list of directions quite
simply. Why not a nested list where each
list is two elements? The first is the
row offset and the second the column
offset. I'm going to choose to go in a
clockwise manner. So we go to the right
next and then the bottom right down
bottom left,
left and lastly top left. With this we
can now extract the direction row and
direction column offsets in our new data
structure. Let's compute the new row,
new column and add the direction offsets
to them.
with these new coordinates will only
recurse forward if our new row is in
bounds as well as our new column.
And lastly, if the grid at this new
coordinate is land, one for land. So,
yep, we'll invoke our DFS function. As
for the last change, we needed the area
of each island, correct? So when we
recurse forward, yeah, we can still mark
land as visited, but we'll also
initialize an area variable to one. And
let's say on any given cell, we exhaust
all eight directions and backtrack. We'd
return our accumulated area as the
return type. This means on the backtrack
of any DFS call, we'll add this area to
the current frames area variable.
And that's it for our DFS. Outside of
this though, in our nested loop, we'll
initialize a result list with which
we'll return.
Since each DFS column returns the area
of each island, we'll simply append it
to our result.
Good work. We got a lot of things done
today. I wish you luck on your
interviews.